Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore. Joined as always by my co-host, Kyle Helson. I want to thank everybody for listening. And you've probably subscribed to the podcast. Please do if you have not. And give us an iTunes rating, five stars, pretty please. Share the podcast is a great way to help the podcast out. It's probably the best way to help the podcast out. So if you like what you're hearing, share it with a friend. And also, if you would like to support the podcast with a couple bucks for either a coffee, because we're not caffeinated enough.
And you can do so at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. Sorry, what was that, Kyle? Oh, yeah, I need to feel like I'm vibrating, you know, all the time. Just constant, constant vibrating. Yeah, the retina rattlers.
We'll have show notes up on the website. We may or may not have a link or two. And for any and all coaching and consultation inquiries, questions and comments, you can email me directly at empiricalcycling at gmail.com. And the question that a lot of people will probably be asking right now about that is, do you just do strength training programs? And I used to, but I no longer do because, frankly, I'm just too busy. So I'd rather have a full-time athlete. Oh, yeah. No, because I really don't want to write.
I really don't want to write generic plans personally. On one hand, it would be nice because it's a passive source of income, but I would rather work more and get new assistant coaches and get more clients to them personally. So that way, I think that we can uphold the standard I have for empirical cycling better that way, but that's just me.
I know not everybody wants to operate that way. But anyway, so speaking of individualizing things, when you go to the gym, Kyle, how do you individualize? Well, I coach you. So how do I individualize your training program? How would you advise people? Because people ask you a lot of lifting stuff, too, because you've been lifting even longer than me. So what do you normally advise them?
ask them what they actually want or tell them to think about what they actually want out of lifting like people think oh I gotta lift or maybe they think oh I feel like I should lift but I have no idea why I'm gonna lift and you're like well you probably should want to have goals identified as to why you're doing something just like if you're gonna do FTP efforts you want to know why you're doing them but with lifting because it
looks very much not like bike racing. It's way less clear for a lot of people initially why they're doing this. And maybe they know why they're doing this. Like I had a friend recently who was like, oh, I realized that like now I'm getting to the point where I'm lasting and breakaways and then I'm losing. So I want to be able to sprint more because you're getting to the end there and going, oh no, you know, oh no. So maybe they've identified that goal, which is a good,
A good start to say, oh, okay, so I want to be able to sprint better, sprint more, sprint faster, whatever, what have you. And then from there, you kind of extract, you work backwards. Or what was Dan Bigham's book, Start from the End? Oh, Start at the End. Yeah, I've got it on my shelf. I just ordered it. I have yet to crack it open. Yeah, something like that. Kind of a similar thing. And I have not read his book either, but...
And likewise, like I just said, if your end goal is don't lose a breakaway sprint in a road race, okay, so you need more sprint power and then you work from there. Yeah. And, you know, if you start at the end for winning a breakaway sprint, actually, the first thing you should probably think about is can I last in this breakaway or can I even get in it in the first place? So, yeah, so like instead of like starting at the last step, you know, being like, oh, okay, so I need to work on my sprint.
Take a step back. This is actually one of the things that I deal with with a lot of clients actually is just as an aside is they're like, man, I'm really gassed at the end of this race. I don't have a sprint. Can we work on my sprint? And it's like the solution is not the sprint at that point. The solution is getting to the end of the race with a full tank of gas or as much as you can have as possible.
So usually that just ends up being more aerobic training. And then at some point it's like, okay, yeah, like you are feeling really good. You've got your sprint and now, or you've got your aerobic engine, you can get to the sprint and now you're losing because you don't have enough watts. You know, that is a very different story. So yeah, that's where like, you know, GoPro footage comes in and, you know, like analyzing the last two or three, four laps before a sprint, et cetera, et cetera.
probably go into the gym thinking they should squat. And I would usually agree with this. So, all right. So let's go over squat stuff because we're going to, you know, nominally the topic today is exercise selection. But, you know, it's us. So we're going to do what we can. So back squat, high bar, low bar.
Front Squat. Where do you normally recommend people begin with this? So typically, the first thing is, do people have any experience with doing one or the other?
and if they have experience with doing something and no experience the other one unless they had a terrible time and are like no no no I know I cannot do back squat like low bar back squat for some reason like okay well and then maybe skip it but typically for people especially for athletes who aren't competing in Olympic weightlifting or powerlifting or strongman or something like that the variation you pick in my opinion kind of doesn't matter provided that you're able to
do it safely and not just get stapled all the time. But I think people obsess a lot about, oh, am I high bar or low bar back squatting? Especially if they're new to it and you go online and you see people saying, oh, low bar is good for more posterior chain or high bar is for weightlifters only or whatever. And you're like, well, not only is high bar and low bar not like a
dichotomy. There's like a gradient of positions where you can put the bar. It doesn't, maybe doesn't matter. I mean, yeah, this is where I would say individualization starts is, you know, if I look at somebody's squat technique and I think that
They are lacking this, that, or the other thing, like a shoulder mobility or ankle mobility or hip mobility. Like if it's impingement or like, you know, you're kind of going to the side, you know, first of all, like getting a real trainer and or a PT to evaluate you is a really big start. So if you have any issues doing anything, like get to a professional ASAP. But, you know, then I would say, yeah, like high bar, low bar, back squat. Like I do low bar myself because I'm...
not that mobile. And also my anatomy, like the length of my legs, joints and femurs and whatnot, put me in a better position for a low bar. So that's just what I do. And it's easier for me to get to full depth. High bar, I have tried. You actually have to rest the bar in your delts. Delts, not delts, traps. I don't really have any traps. And when asked to...
tense them, to flex them. I don't know how. If I'm doing shrugs, obviously I can, but it's not comfortable. The bar doesn't feel good there. I just don't do them. Furthermore, I don't have the mobility to do them because it puts my torso more upright. Then my knees have to go more forward. I don't have that kind of ankle mobility. That's where I'm at with that. Front squat.
Oh, sorry. No, go ahead. Oh, I think, I think that's exactly right. Like some people you'll find they, uh, yeah, because of anatomy and obviously the sport you pick like powerlifting tends to select genetics wise for people who are going to be good at low bar squat because you can lift heavier, absolute loads that way generally. And like Olympic weightlifting, because you have to
catch a clean or a snatch in a very upright position that's very much like high bar. It selects for people whose anatomy fits in that. And cycling doesn't do either. Cycling is just like, I don't know. So yeah, whichever one feels more comfortable and allows you to get work in safely is the best one. Not to mention, if you know one over the other, especially if you're just going to
You've always done high bar, say, and you're wondering, oh, is it worth the time to learn to do low bar? Probably not, because squatting is not your sport. And so all that time you'd spend relearning a slightly different squat pattern and having to drop the weight down, blah, blah, blah. If you don't have a good reason to change, you don't have to.
Yeah, I completely agree. Yeah, and a lot of it's just that, you know, cyclists, we don't have a lot of time in the gym. Like, well, Kyle and I were in the gym all year, but most cyclists are not in the gym all year long. And, you know, if you're going to learn a new technique like something complex, like a snatch or a clean, you know, this is going to be a big time investment to get it right and to not get injured and to eventually get up to loads that you're going to have to...
that you're going to need to use for the exercise to be useful instead of just the bar for three or four or five, six months. You mean by PVC pipe cleans? Well, actually, speaking of which, I think people are probably wondering right now, should I do cleans or plyos or something like that? So let's put explosive stuff on the list for a couple minutes from now.
But I wanted to get to front squat also. So one of the things I think to think about is that between low bar, high bar, and front squat is that the torso gets more and more and more upright while you make these variations. And so as this happens, this pushes your hips a little more forward.
because the bar needs to stay over your midfoot to be balanced. And so as this happens, your knees go a little further out over your toes. And you can kind of counteract some of this by doing wider variations and whatnot. But for the most part, it does require a good deal of mobility, right? Yeah. And you'll see this if you pull up a picture of an Olympic weightlifter either catching a clean,
in the bottom position or doing a front squat, like their knees will go way far over their toes because there's literally no way for you to get your body in. Unless you have the world's shortest femurs where your femurs are like your femurs and like tibia and fibula are so short that you can like bend your way all the way down there.
you know not have your knees go over your toes but your knees have to go over your toes in order to do that and so if you don't have the ankle mobility like the dorsiflexion to be able to smash
your upper, the upper part of your foot toward your shin, you're going to have a bad time and your heels are actually going to lift off the ground and you're going to be unstable and you're going to fall forward or you're going to fall backward or something like that. Yeah. And that's why a lot of lifting shoes have a big heel to toe drop. Like my, my shoes, I just got powerlifting shoes again and they've got like a, I don't know, it's like three quarter inch between the two. And like when you put them on.
You know, you feel like you're wearing heels. Well, you are wearing heels. I know, but it's like, like, I was like, Oh my God, is this what, is this what people put on their feet for like, you know, with an evening gown or something? It's like, this isn't, it's way more than a three quarters of an inch though. Yeah. It's weird. Cause I feel so normal walking in a cycling cleat. Like I can legit run in a cycling cleat.
And I've done it. I remember I was running a track session and two people crashed while they were doing a practice race against each other. They just decided to occupy the same space at the same time as they crossed the line. And so I ran from where I was standing down onto the track. And after everybody was cleared that they were okay, everybody was like...
Wow, you can run in those things. And I feel much less comfortable in the lifting shoes, but it's just, it's been a while. So yeah, lifting shoes can help for ankle mobility to like achieve more depth, but it's not like a cure-all for like lacking mobility. Like you can see if
um you know you should still obviously work on fixing your movement patterns without the heel lift but at some point it becomes necessary equipment like if you're a weightlifter and whatnot because I don't think there's no weightlifters that like go out and chuck taylor's right the only example I can think of is um Toshiki Yamamoto who is a men's 96 kilogram weightlifter from Japan will snatch in a crossfit shoe
because of a people people don't exactly know why but people surmise it is because of a history of shoulder injuries and it makes it easier for him and he's got ridiculous mobility so that he doesn't need the heel to hit the bottom position of a snatch keep in mind he's snatching like you know 170 kilos but
He doesn't need the extra heel lift, and it, like, allows him to have a better torso and shoulder position where he's less prone to get injuries. But then he'll literally switch shoes and come out and do clean and jerks in regular, like, Nike weightlifting shoes or whatever. Okay, yeah. And so that's one of those things where if you're going to think about doing this for yourself, like, you know, this is one of those big personalization things, obviously. Yeah. And Chuck Taylors are a really common suggestion when people first look at
How am I going to go to the gym? What equipment do I need? People will say Chuck Taylors. And those are great. And there's nothing wrong with doing them. And people lift plenty of heavy weights. I'm sure there are people out there who have probably squatted like 800 pounds in Chuck Taylors. It's not a problem. Yeah, like no wraps, no belt. Yeah, I mean, there's a video of like...
Chad Wesley Smith doing like a deadlift in like boat like an 800 pound deadlift in boat shoes. You know, like whatever it doesn't. I remember an Instagram video. Some dude like goes to like do a five or six hundred pound squat. He's wearing flip flops and he's had no warm up and he gets down to the bottom of his squat and his his foot slips. Oh, God. And he lands on the safety arms and he's OK. But like.
barely. Yeah. Sweating a little bit. Yeah. Yeah. No, I know. And actually like a good shoe, like Chuck Taylor's are made for skateboarding. And so they're made to have a lot of grip on a very smooth surface. Like I had been squatting in my regular sneakers, which is a, it's fine. But I was like, I really got to get the extra stuff and the extra lifts just to get a little more depth.
blah, blah, blah. So I noticed when I went in today with my proper lifting shoes that I had a lot more grip on the ground. Like in my regular sneakers, if I had to like adjust my position a little bit, you know, just lift, slide and just fine. I did the same pattern today in my lifting shoes and my foot went nowhere. I was like, oh wow, I'm so much more stable. This is great.
That kind of thing, like the grip on the ground that you have is super, super, super helpful to feeling really stable and confident in your squat. Yeah, that's true. Also why you don't see carpet in gyms or something, right? Oh, yeah. Oh, God, never. Yeah, if your gym has carpet under the squat rack, find a different gym, please.
Although your gym may be in your home, in fact, living room gym. Yeah, in which case you may want a heavy neoprene mat or something like that. Excuse me. So what's another reason you might want to choose one of these exercises over the other? So shoulder mobility, I think we kind of touched on for low, high front squat. Like front squat, you do need a lot of shoulder mobility, like long lats to really get your elbows up. But also...
You can do the cross-arm thing for it, and you can also get straps. Like, Kyle, you do the straps for your front squats, right? Yeah, so I try hard to do, you know, quote-unquote proper front squats and have my hands underneath in, like, a front rack position, like a weightlifter, but when I'm tired or when I'm just too tight, and from, you know, be it just life or
Having done something else, I will put straps around the bar, not around my hands, but so that they're sticking up from the bar, kind of like levers or something, and so you can grab them, and it takes a little bit of stress off your elbows and wrists.
when you are trying to do that kind of more traditional front squat position. Also, I'm sure a lot of people are wondering, like, what does a lifting strap look like? So it's a loop, and it's sewn at one end, and then there's a long tail. So it almost looks like a noose.
But it doesn't slide anywhere. So through that noose end, you actually put the other end of the strap, the long tail, through it, and then you hold on to the long tail. So it puts a lot of friction on it, and that's how it stays there. It's not like knotted or anything. Yeah. Yeah. And we can link to pictures of this. And the other thing is...
I have I've never used it, but they sell this like strange looking almost like a it's like a weird front mounted like vest almost where it's supposed to make it easier for you to like keep a front squat secure where it's got it's basically got like pegs sticking out of it so you can kind of and it's like two shoulder straps that they're metal and like welded together and you you can.
Put it on yourself and then put a barbell on there to try to keep it on you more stably. But that's probably fairly uncommon unless your gym has one. Like most people don't own one of those. That sounds like one of those giant suits that Ripley was in in Aliens, you know? Yeah. Well, actually, I think what you're kind of touching on, what the suit kind of gets to is like a front squat actually requires a ton of ab strength and endurance.
Yes. Like doing a lot of front squats. Yeah, upper back too. Like my upper back gets really tired doing front squats, especially if it's like the last lift of the day. Yeah, you could be pretty tired for that kind of stuff. But one of the reasons you may want to front squat is you cannot put a weight on your back.
I know several people whose main lift is a front squat and if that's you then it's maybe worth it to you know work on the mobility and work on the strength to front squat comfortably and like get that lift fairly heavy and it's also because your torso is a little more upright it actually is a lot more quad focused as an exercise so if that's something that you want to work on
then a front squat is actually one of the better quad dominant exercises that you can do that's closed chain because like Kyle you're missing a PCL and so like you can't do open chain exercises like you know knee extensions or like sissy squats or anything like that so yeah so it's a good exercise for somebody like you for sure yeah I will say the other thing too is that generally just working with lighter loads is going to be less risky should you have any weird back
concerns. Even if you're at the elite Olympic weightlifting, powerlifting level, your front squat max is only going to be 80% to 85% of your back squat max. You automatically get to bump a few pounds off. It may actually even be less mentally taxing as well if you can use slightly lower loads because you don't need as much
like whole body intensity to support such heavy loads on your back, for example. Yeah, that's true. And that's actually, that's one of the things I think makes squatting with a belt easier. Like when you get to heavy, heavy loads, putting a belt on like, and there's no, by the way, there's no minimum load at which you
need or don't need a belt. This is a very personal decision. I've got people I coach who are squatting less than 200 pounds who need a belt. And I've got people I coach who can squat into the 400 pounds who need a belt sometimes and don't others. So, you know, it's one of those things where it's a little personal, but when you throw a belt on finally, the requirements, like the mental requirements to like keep your core stable.
When you get to the bottom of a squat, it goes down quite a bit. You still have to really brace hard. It's not like it doesn't make up for like free. Yeah, it doesn't make up for core strength, but it increases intra-abdominal pressure, which stabilizes the spine. Google that like, you know, belts, squat belt and squat university or something like that. And Aaron Horschig has a lot of really good resources on that.
and as well with belts some people think like oh your your abs are gonna get less strong or something like that and generally because the belt allows you to typically lift higher loads than you would without a belt the consensus is that your abs will work equally as hard but because you are more stable when you are
lifting heavier loads, you are doing the same amount of work effectively, right? Like if your abs are a little bit looser because you're not wearing a belt, you're not going to be able to lift as much weight even though your abs are still trying 100%. And then if you put a belt on and your abs are still trying 100%, well, you're more stable and you're able to output a little bit more force, but it's not making your abs weaker if you use a belt. Yeah. And I know one of my friends does some CrossFit and
I posted on Instagram once about wearing a belt and she was like, well, you should never wear a belt because it means you haven't earned the weight. And it's like, that's an interesting philosophy. And we had a very frank discussion in exchange of ideas following that. Yeah, I would say that is, I mean...
It is personal preference. First order, it's personal preference, personal comfort. Second order is, yes, I know people who will put on belts very early because they have a history of back problems or a family history of back problems or whatever. A belt doesn't prevent back problems, nor does it prevent back injuries, but it might be that cue that you need or that little bit of extra insurance that you need.
Something to push against. This is one of the things that I tell people with bracing. If you're listening, you can do this right now as long as you're not driving or anything. Stand up and just hinge at your hips. Just bend over at your waist. Keep your knees locked. Don't squat or anything. Just bend over.
Take a giant breath, what's called the Valsalva Maneuver, also known as you are forcing a giant shit out. And so hold your breath really hard and like tighten your back and your abs and then hinge again. And you're going to feel a difference in the stability of your torso. And that's kind of what we're getting at here.
Torso, like this kind of gets into like back angle, neutral back, rounded spine. Yes, you should always aim for a quote unquote neutral spine, but that for most people does not mean that you will be able to keep like the exact same like board stiff spinal position or torso position the entire lift. Like lots of research indicates that.
Neutral is kind of a range, kind of like everything else we've said before. But obviously, do not lift with your back. You can watch all those hilarious videos of people just doing terrible looking squats, like looking like a dog, like bending over, taking a shit or whatever. Don't do that. But there are degrees to which you should be worried about your back rounding and being hyper, hyper concerned that your back
moves just a little bit is probably not a concern. Now, if your butt swings all the way under your hips and you like, yeah. And you round your lower back during what's called butt wink. Yeah. And according to a lot of PTs, by the way, there are some butt wink that's benign and there are some butt wink that's malignant. So you get checked by a professional for your butt wink. Yeah.
And note that even if you have great mobility, I can squat all the way down, back squat, high bar with your hamstrings touching my calves. And if I go totally unweighted and just let myself relax all the way down without a bar, my lower back will round a little bit underneath my hips. But that's without a bar.
When I actually have a bar and I'm squatting, I stop a little bit above that absolute lowest complete position where your butt totally rounds underneath. Yeah, and it's funny because I think one of the things I've noticed while coaching people to squat, especially in person, is once we kind of get into a certain range of weight, their technique actually gets better. It's like...
You need a little bit of load to balance. Otherwise, there's nothing, there's no proprioceptive, is that the right word for balance? Whatever the word is, like there's nothing to balance, there's nothing to focus on. So like if you shift your center of gravity a little more forward or a little further back, like it's not gonna be that bad, like with just a bar versus like with, you know, let's say 100 pounds, you know? So like having 100 pounds in your back,
Now you've got something to balance, and this will, you know, force you to go, oh, this way is too forward, I feel it in my lower back, this way is too far back, I've got to like, you know, push my quads forward or whatever, like, you know, there's a whole bunch of stuff that, where was I going with that, Kyle? A whole bunch of stuff that's individualized or personalized about your squat, like you won't be able to fit into a...
like a cookie cutter squat. Like I mentioned this last time, but like Joel Seidman, everyone squats exactly the same. Like it turns out, no, like everyone does not squat exactly the same. Yeah. Um, all right. So we're, we were kind of, um, well, we kind of got sidetracked on squats, but I think that's going to be good listening. So, um, so when it comes to exercise selection, obviously, so squats, very, very good place to start.
and I think if you have not done any strength training ever or you have only done strength training intermittently a good squat a lot of the time is going to be like 60 to 70% of what you need in a strength training program for just about any goal whether it's health or improving your sprint or you know
What else is there? Looking good? Yeah, just a mental break from having to slog away miles on the trainer in the winter when it's snowing. Yeah, because I think one of the things that I hate saying the word settled science, but let's say it seems to be well regarded until proven otherwise, sort of like a theory of gravity. It's like a quote-unquote theory, but like...
Everybody's like, yeah, yeah, it's a theory, sure. Where initially, when you start to do any kind of strength training exercise, neurally, this is one of the things that improves the most earliest. So being able to recruit more muscle mass and being able to
Find those little muscles that you haven't used before and figuring out how to turn on your quads more or use your hips better or whatever it is. And early on, it's not entirely all neural gains. You do start to build some sarcomeres and some contractile tissue and you get a little sarcoplasmic expansion and the whole yada yada. But early on, a good squat is really going to take you
A long, long way. Like when I started strength training to improve my sprint, I think the squat, like just improvements in squats improved my sprint for about six to eight months or something like that before I had to like start, you know, thinking deeper about, oh, how now how do I do this? You know? Yeah. And that's just.
It's akin to when you started riding your bike and you never had to do any interval training and just riding your bike for funsies with your friends made you better at every aspect of riding your bike. You could just do coffee shop ride after coffee shop ride and you would get dropped less and less or whatever on your Wednesday night worlds. And this is pretty similar to when you just start.
or just start lifting weights or if you're returning from a long hiatus of lifting. Yeah. And so, okay. So after your normal gains level out, or let's say you've been getting into the gym for a couple of years and now you're comfortable squatting, maybe even like a year, a couple of months, you're comfortable squatting, but you notice that, let's say you're trying to improve your sprint, your sprint's not improving anymore. So I always recommend...
also doing a unilateral exercise. So that would be like a single leg squat, single leg press, rear leg elevated split squat, also known as Bulgarian squat. Really any kind of variation therein is gonna be really, really good for you to work in as like a second exercise. What other unilateral stuff do we have? Lunges, split squats, help.
There's like box step ups you can that's one if you have a if you you can do that with dumbbells or a barbell or nothing but probably nothing just your own body weight is not sufficient to do resistance training on step ups but if you can find like a stable box emphasis on stable stable stable stable box not like a rolling chair or something you can do yeah you can do that or
Yeah, like any number of lunge variations. I guess you said lunges, but there are a number of lunge variations that fall into there. Actually, I would recommend personally, I would recommend against box step ups. Like I could probably do a box step up with well over 200 pounds.
and there's no fucking way that I'm going to do that. Like being on one leg while elevating yourself onto a whatever inch box, that does not sound appealing to me because if you bobble it, well. Yeah, you do this with safety. No, no, no. I'm not recommending you do this in an open field with nothing around you.
On Instagram, when I see people do this, I see them doing it with no safety whatsoever, which scares me, by the way. So if you have done that, and I follow you on Instagram, I have seen it, and I have been scared and wondering if I DM you about it, about the injury risk therein, does that qualify as mansplaining? They just have better insurance. Even other men, sorry. So, yeah.
So anyway, so let's, yeah, so like when it comes to programming with exercise selection, I would actually say, try to pick like two to three things to focus on for like a two to three month phase. And if you're lifting longer than that, then you're going to want some exercise variation. But for the most part, that's going to get most people most of the way to where they want to be. Yeah. And you're, oh yeah, sorry, go ahead.
And if any of you have done any sort of maybe traditional bro splits or bodybuilding training, this is maybe going to sound like not enough exercises. But keep in mind, you're not going to be lifting four days a week trying to do push-pull legs, abs and biceps and calves. You are in there twice a week, probably not three times a week if you have other riding to do.
You don't need to have this laundry list of different exercises to do. And it's probably easier for you to track progress and remember what you did last time if it's only a handful and not 10 different exercises that you keep rotating through. Yeah. And as somebody who's done 10 different exercises, don't. It's exhausting.
I remember when I started getting into the gym and I was like, I'm going to lift all the things. I would go home so beyond exhausted. And the last couple lifts, they were all getting pretty dicey in terms of balance and technique because I was tired. And that's not the right way to go about it. So your first exercise is always going to be your best and your strongest in terms of technique.
After that, you want to make sure that the injury risk is going down with the increasing fatigue. If you're going to do, let's say, heavy back squat followed by single leg press. We'll talk about presses in a second. Maybe really late in the phase, you'll add a third exercise. You'll be like, maybe sissy squats or something like that.
you like the weight is going to go down for each one of these things. Like you'll see that, you know, how, like, what would you be doing for sissy squats? Like for a load, like maybe a hundred pounds, like just grab dumbbells, 250 pound dumbbells. So like, instead of having a bar on your back, you know, like that would be the way I would approach it. I would also say, remember that what you think you could hit for like three sets of five when you're, as an example for when you're fresh.
is not what you're going to be able to hit for three sets of five after you've already done a hard exercise. Your ego might be like, oh, I can do this. It'll be great. And then you'll get three reps into that second set and be like, I don't know if I'm going to survive. So this is where being honest with yourself and admitting that feeling fatigued is fine. Your muscles don't know that you're lifting slightly less weight. All they know is that you're telling them to work hard.
and that they're getting closer and closer to failure and they're accumulating more fatigue. Like the exact poundage, like if you go to a gym regularly and you know the machine, say how the leg press, how to load it, and then you go to a different gym and you're like, oh, I don't know how much weight, like, oh, am I going to look like a wimp because I put less weight on this leg press but it felt hard? Like, well, no, if it still feels about as hard, like.
That's what's important. It's not the exact number of pounds. Nobody judges each other in the gym except today I felt a little judged because I was squatting 225 on one leg. And people give you some looks when you're doing that kind of stuff. But like for example, last week I did an easy week and I, against my better judgment, I did it anyway. I did a one rep max single leg squat test. Nice. And I did 275 despite the fact that I was exhausted from doing
pause squats, like long five second pauses with, yeah, I did a bunch of them. And then I was like, my legs were a little shaky and I was like, YOLO, let's do some single leg squats. Cause the gym was mostly empty, but there were a couple of people in there and man, they look at me. So I was, I was judged there. Although I felt it was in a positive way, like, wow, look what that person can do. But you know, if I had been just squatting, like, you know, the bar,
And literally nobody will have looked at me at all for any reason whatsoever, other than maybe I had a cool shirt on or something. But yeah, like the load doesn't matter. And so, so anyway, so, oh, the reason I brought that up, it was not to brag, even though it is a cool brag, I think. I brought that up because like, so about, you know, 80% of a one rep max, you should be able to like do what, six?
rep max, something like that, seven maybe? Yeah, yeah, yeah. 85 is typically like five, so 80 is going to be in that six, seven-ish range. Yeah, and so I did sets of three because I was so tired from my main sets of squats. Like a three, like I could have done like a four rep max and it would have been dicey, so let's call it a three. Like I could do my three like over and over and it was like a nine, nine and a half RPE.
Yeah. You're tired. Yeah. I was thinking, okay, if I'm feeling good, I'll be able to rep this for four or five and feel like it's about an eight, eight and a half and like, nope, I was tired. So I was just doing less reps at the same weight and I added more sets and that was one of the ways that I was like, okay, this is going to be good strength training for me.
The other way to do it would have been to take some weight off the bar, but I'm lazy, so I didn't. I just did more sets, which was actually more fatiguing. I should have gone down to 205 and done sets of five. But anyway, so do as I say, not as I do. So I mentioned press in there a little bit. So one of the cool things that we can do with leg strength training is
I kind of like presses and like hack squat machines and all this kind of variation stuff like belt squats because it actually takes the balance a little bit more out of the equation even the Smith machine can be really useful for this kind of stuff I know a lot of people hate on Smith machine and I'm kind of one of them sometimes but it can be really useful so if you have really really zero ankle mobility like a hack squat or a leg press or a Smith machine can actually be a lifesaver
for strength training because you no longer have to worry about balancing the load because the load is on a defined track already. And you can put your feet wherever you want underneath that load or to guide that load. So you can have your feet way out in front of you on a Smith machine. And when you have to go up, you've got a force vector going back if you're back squatting, but you can put your feet way out in front of you.
relative to where you would be in a squat and like that's going to be safe and effective, right? Yeah. Yeah. And if you actually want, RP Strength has a pretty good video on how to actually do Smith machine squats correctly because, and it does take a little bit more of a bodybuilding approach, but the technique pointers are still good. Yeah. Because like you said, taking the balance out of it, if you're a bodybuilder and you're just trying to get just a...
oodles and oodles of volume in. It's much easier to do them on a leg press or a hack squat or a Smith machine than just trying to like Ronnie Coleman your way through 800-pound squats all the time. And there's a reason why Ronnie Coleman is all beat up now in his old age, and that's because he did a lot of dumb stuff. Yeah. Lightweight, baby. Yeah. He's the best. Everyone loves those videos, like Ronnie Coleman, like leg pressing like 2,500 pounds there, but don't do that. Just don't.
Yeah, he's the goat for a reason and also a boatload of steroids. So being smart and knowing that if your body isn't happy doing something, don't do it. Don't force yourself to do an exercise because everyone on Instagram is doing it. Yeah, and this is one of the things where, by the way, a consultation would be great because I can help you. Well, I'm not going to assess your range of motion and stuff like that, but I can help you put together.
like, oh, you can do this, you can't do this. Like if you come to me with a list of things you can and cannot do, I can help you put together a program with a consultation. I'm not going to program it for you, but we can kind of go through, you know, main phases and loading guidelines and whatnot. So also speaking of, this is a good time to plug an article. If you, I actually wrote an article I was invited to by a friend of mine, Dana Kotler. Thank you, Dana.
It is for the physical medicine and rehabilitation clinics of North America. So this is a medical journal and there's an issue on cycling rehab. And I did kind of a primer article on, you know, modern cycling metrics for physicians.
But that was only as a premise to get doctors reading or learning more about how modern cyclists quantify their training. And it was a jumping off point to talk about how physicians and coaches and athletes need to communicate in order to better serve cyclists who are coming back from injury and illness.
A lot of the athletes I've had who have had injuries, you know, there's a little bit of communication between me and them and the doctor saying, what exercises can this person do? What can they not do?
What's the right way to load? How light can they go? How hard can they go? Like what's the progression kind of stuff? So these are things that I got from doctors and the athletes had to spend some time explaining to doctors like what's happening? Why? When? How much are you riding? You're riding how many miles? What? No, hours? Okay, how many hours? Wow, that's a lot. So I have an author's link.
so this is going to be valid only until 9th of December 2021 it's going to be free full text then it goes behind a paywall for a year I think and then it's going to be full text again so head over to empiricalcycling.com slash podcast dash episodes and you know get to
The notes and this link will be there. So I hope it's useful. I'm actually going to have Dana on the podcast to discuss it. And she also wrote some stuff for that issue, which I'm really looking forward to reading. And we're going to discuss that when she comes on. So that's going to be awesome. But anyway, so if... And she is actually that type of doctor, not unlike me. Yes. She is a legit medical doctor. I have gone to her for some of my injuries.
and she has been really excellent and she actually runs with another person, the Spalding Cycling Medicine Clinic in Newton, Mass. So she's fantastic and I've gone to a couple of her talks and talks with like Greg Robodeau and they're great. So check that out, check out that whole issue if you can, if your university or employer has a subscription, check out whatever's free to check out. And anyway, so
The reason I brought all that up is because if you have issues with range of motion or if you have injuries like you've got a torn something or other or you've got a permanent issue with like something in your back and you cannot do any back loading like this is a good thing for you know to say you know
Say to your coach or say to your doctor, what can I and can I not do? What should I be doing? And then, you know, the list of wants from the coach versus the list of cans and cannots from the doctor can come together and form something very nice in the middle. Injury is going to be one of those things that can really restrict your exercise selection. So again,
I'm going to emphasize as emphatically as possible, talk to your doctor because your coach is not a doctor. I'm not a doctor. Getting to see a PT who knows cycling and or lifting and stuff like that is going to be fantastic. And also being honest with these people. If you're paying them or your insurances or both, and so if you're doing something and you don't
understand why or you don't think this is the right thing, just ask. They're hopefully not going to say, I can't tell you it's a secret or something like that. Having an engaged patient is usually a positive thing, and especially when it's something like PT where you have this expectation of a return to competition or a return to training or what have you, being upfront about that and say, I want to get back to this point.
Do you think this is realistic? Time frame, things like that. Don't just be like, oh, well, this is what the PT said. Well, why did they say that? I don't know. Yeah, having some back and forth with your PT or doctor between visits can be really, really excellent. And I know a lot of them are very busy and it can be hard to get a hold of.
but actually I know a regular podcast listener who is a PT who may have some interesting thoughts on all this kind of stuff so I'll talk to him about coming on the program too so oh so one of the things that I think would be cool to touch on here to finish up with would be the bilateral deficit oh it's your favorite it is my favorite every time you brag about single leg squats show off
Well, okay, so let's put the bilateral deficit into perspective. This is a cool brain thing that I really like. Normally, you might expect what you can do on one leg for a basically identical motion is half of what you can do on two. So if you can squat 100 pounds on one leg, you could probably squat.
200 pounds on two. And this actually turns out to be wrong a lot of the time, especially with cyclists and people who do a lot of stuff on one leg. If you're a bilateral athlete, like a powerlifter or Olympic weightlifter, this is one of those things that is going to be irrelevant to you for obvious reasons. But for cyclists, after you're kind of, you know,
initial strength gains have tapped out with bilateral stuff. Unilateral stuff is really the only place you have to go. Did I miss this in the last podcast? I feel like I did. I had spent a lot of time working on getting my squat better, my two-leg squat, and it didn't help my sprint. This is one of those things where the bilateral deficit is because you can spend more brain power
on one leg, then you can spend it on two together. Like there's less load in terms of neural load, I suppose we could say, or that's the theory anyway. And so you can spend the rest of that or like, you know, 60 or 70% of it or whatever will go to one leg. So Kyle, what's your approximate one leg versus two leg squat?
I have one leg squatted, I want to say 325. That's kind of a lot. And I have two legs squatted 440. So that is... That's a lot. You can one leg squat 74% of what you can do on two. Yeah, and like...
Yeah, I mean, and it even gets, and it holds both for maxes and for reps in my experience. Like I can do sets of five to six with like 265 on one leg squat and I can't do sets of five to, I can't do any two leg squats of over 500 pounds. So yeah, it is a kind of weird.
It's a kind of weird phenomenon, and you kind of get used to it. But I think it also definitely gets me some weird looks at the gym sometimes. Yeah, I told you about some of the looks I got earlier. Yeah, exactly. Because I have about the same bilateral deficit that you do. It's about 70-75%. It's where my one leg is versus my two leg. So my one leg, one rep max, 275. My two leg is approximately 365 right now.
Maybe a little higher, but probably not by much. And that's because Kyle and I do this kind of stuff all year round. So our bilateral deficit is probably about as high as one could reasonably make it. And one of the things that I noticed while I was doing experiments on myself is that when I was entirely focused on single leg strength,
it tapped out after a little while. Like I was repping, I think 240, 45 pounds on one leg and I was not really working on my two leg squat and it just stopped. I could not get stronger. And I was like, man, what is with this? And I had to think about it for a little bit, but that's what it was is my bilateral deficit. Like I hadn't done any two leg squat strength stuff. And so it was just kind of the same.
that it had been for the last, like, I don't know, month or whatever, or two. And yeah, I just tapped out. It's sort of like FTP becoming a higher percentage of VO2 max. And at a certain point, it just stops. And getting it higher and higher over years, you know, can be a very, very slow and, you know, agonizingly small process. Because a lot of the time when you do that kind of thing,
you know the improvements you see are like barely outside the margin of error of a power meter or they can be so this is one of those things where you know it can be difficult to assess also because you know was that really a 9.5 was that really a one rep max was that really a three rep max like did you have a little bit more in you was that like you know Kyle I think you can elaborate a little more on this yeah and I think as well
It is the sort of thing that when you are doing a sport that's actually going to most sports like most sports only occurs on one leg. You probably have some latent bilateral deficit already like you touched on and doing more of your sport may actually just make that even more apparent. But then you're really hammering it on.
in the gym when you're doing one leg exercises. But obviously what this might lead you to think is like, oh man, should I be doing like high rep one leg squats or something? Because that's like even closer to like pedaling a bike. And the answer is definitely no. Do not go and do 100 rep one leg squats or pistols or something like that. Please don't. Or like quarter squats because that's the range of motion that you have on a bike or whatever it is. It's like, this is one of my favorite
One of my favorite metaphors is, and I didn't even hear it from anything cycling related. I heard it from some strength and conditioning coach. Actually, it might have been Jump. What's that? Jump University or Jump something? Yeah, I can't think of the name. Yeah, it might have been that. So I think that person was saying,
You know, if you want to do strength and conditioning for basketball players and you want them to jump higher, it's going to be very rare that you go make them go do more jumping because that's what they do on the court for hours a day. Instead, you know, you're going to just have them get stronger, like have them lift. You know, because we'll talk about the, you know, the force velocity curve another time. But, you know, that's what you want to do.
it's like when you do cycling specific stuff in the gym, that's like extremely cycling specific. It's like, why don't you just go ride a bike? Yeah. Yeah. And somewhere, somewhere in that like specific range is like this cutoff of like doing one, doing unilateral versus bilateral exercises. Okay. That's getting you a little bit closer, but there's definitely this cutoff where, yeah, if you wanted to bet.
get really better at bike stuff you ride a bike and obviously lifting is not really looking like a bike but splitting that excuse me splitting that those exercises up into both single leg and double leg exercises is probably pretty useful as well as just like with your lower body you can think about doing that for your upper body as well say you do some rows or something like that because that's kind of like riding a bike and
If you're also thinking about sprinting, yes, you generally kind of use your upper body in a more isometric fashion, but rarely, except for standing starts, are you going to be pulling with both arms at the same time or engaging both arms equally as hard. Yeah. Although there are, this is very much an aside, although there are some interesting...
studies out there showing that if you think about engaging your lats and actually instead of pulling on the bars up and down, you actually think about pushing the bars left and right, that can actually add quite a bit of power output. Yeah, I think there's, and this could be a whole other episode about like sprint on the bike sprint technique. There's little things that I think sometimes people who are like just natural sprinters maybe kind of figured out on their own and then other people are like, ah.
Why does my sprint always goofy and feels a little awkward and you just like tweak things here and there. Yeah. Well, it's like a neural learning thing, right? Like you're getting used to those firing patterns and what needs to be tense and what needs to do what. Like I think like the first time I ever sprinted on a bike when I had a power meter, I think I barely broke a thousand watts. I was really going for it. And then.
Over the next couple of years, like three, four or five years, I added about a hundred watts to my sprint every year and I wasn't doing any strength training. I was just, you know, working my day job as a carpenter and just racing and riding and that was it. And just through that, that got my sprint better.
from neural patterning. And that's one of the things that may or may not be a limiter for a lot of people out there listening like, oh, should I get into the gym? It's like, if you get into the gym, also think about making your, you know, doing more specific movements. So like doing big gear sprints or small gear sprints can actually help you embed better motor patterns into yourself when you want to make big power.
everything in every single sprint session. You don't want to do like, I'm going to do 10 big gear sprints, then I'm going to do 10 small gear sprints, then I'm going to do 10 max power sprints. Oh my God, my power hasn't gone up. Yeah. Your power actually starts to tank at the end of doing that because you just did 30 quote unquote maximal sprints. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. But yeah, I think there's something to be said for that. Like we said earlier,
Getting into the gym for a lot of people will likely see their sprint power to start to go up and up and up. And then eventually it won't keep going up and up and up. And the answer is not, you know, 300-pound squat good, 600-pound squat better necessarily. It may be, especially if you've been lifting for a while, it may be some of these other things as well.
Yeah, and we'll kind of talk about that as we go with this series because I think we've gotten some good feedback on these episodes or on the last episode of just kind of talking like this and kind of rambling about strength training type stuff.
Hey Jamie, pull up that picture of those aliens faking the moon landing for me, will ya? Oh yeah, that's a Joe Rogan reference, I believe. I haven't listened to Joe Rogan in like over a year or more. Yeah, his like production assistant or whoever, his name is Jamie and he always has a projector or whatever and they always pull up dumb shit.
Yeah, we don't have that. We don't have video. We have faces for radio and it's going to stay that way. So yeah. All right. You should subscribe to our OnlyFans. OnlyFans for quads, just quads. Only femurs. Only femurs.
All right. All right. I think that's our clue to kind of bring this ship in for a landing. So thanks, everybody, for listening. Again, subscribe to the podcast. Oh, also, I forgot to mention in the intro, but YOLO.
On Instagram, weekend AMAs in the story, so at empiricalcycling if you want to check that out. I'm always asking about training, and I've been in the habit of doing it a little bit during the week too when I need a distraction between sets, so why not more screen time on Instagram? So watch out for those during the week, Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays, Fridays, my usual lifting days, so check those out.
give us an iTunes rating of five stars pretty please and share the podcast if you liked it with a friend link it you know it's free we're ad free we are never going to be advertising manscaped
Ouch Ouch Although we don't really compete with them That's true With the podcast in question If they pay us enough, maybe We'll talk about it, Manscaped, get at me The email is empiricalcyclingatgmail.com For any coaching and consultation, inquiries, questions, comments You can email me there Donate to the show, empiricalcycling.com We have the show notes up on the website We'll link to the article I mentioned
I guess that will be that. So I will see everybody in the next episode, hopefully next week. Hey, this was closer to 10 minutes than the last one.